"Fight Fighters" is the 10th episode of the first season of Gravity Falls. It premiered on September 14, 2012 on Disney Channel.

**Official Overview

After being challenged to a fight by Wendy's boyfriend, Robbie, Dipper is shocked when his favorite Fight Fighters fighter, Rumble McSkirmish, comes to life to defend him, but Dipper soon loses control of Rumble and has to find a way to stop him from seriously injuring Robbie.

**Synopsis

The episode begins with Soos showing Stan and Mabel the Arcade games. He explains that he learned his daily life skills from them, and walks over to Old Man McGucket, who is seen playing a dance game that is out of order. Stan inserts a coin into a machine called Insert Token! and wins immediately, but realizes the game is a scam when it then tells him to insert another token. Dipper and Wendy are then seen playing a game called Fight Fighters; Dipper wins the round, and Wendy playfully insists that he cheated. They start another round, Wendy saying that she is going to punch the ref and Dipper saying he would help. The latter gets annoyed when Robbie enters the room, showing Wendy a flier for his band. Then he pushes Dipper out of the way, and plays against Wendy himself. As the two are competing against each other in Fight Fighters, Wendy tells Robbie that she is going camping with her father, but Robbie doesn't listen due to the fact that he is too busy focusing on the game. He then puts his arm around Wendy and glares at Dipper with suspicion and contempt.

Back at the Mystery Shack, Mabel, Dipper, Soos and Stan are playing a card game. Mabel wins, and Stan complains that she doesn't even know what they're playing, and Mabel's guess is 'Go Fish'. They soon hear an electric guitar being played outside, which Soos thinks is a radio station inside his head but is actually Robbie. Stan asks if Robbie is the twerp who is always making 'goo-goo eyes' at Wendy, and Soos adds that Robbie called him "Big Dude" once, which hurt his feelings. Mabel then asks if Dipper wants her to sic Waddles on him again, but Dipper tells her he'll handle it. Once outside, Dipper informs Robbie that Wendy is out camping with her family that day, which surprises Robbie although she told him the day before. Dipper then says Robbie doesn't pay attention to her under his breath. But Robbie hears him and gets furious. He tells him that he knows that Dipper likes Wendy, and pulls out his phone, threatening to call her to tell her. Panicking, Dipper slaps the phone out of Robbie's hands, accidentally breaking it. He hurriedly says he would buy Robbie a new one, but Robbie picks up Dipper and tells him that he's "not gonna get off that easily." Stan then opens the window to tell them to stay right there and that he knows a fight when he sees one. Robbie then throws Dipper on the ground telling him to meet him at Circle Park at 3:00 before walking off, upsetting Stan. Dipper gets scared and says he needs to hide but Stan says he can face him like a man or hide like a wimp. Dipper choses to do the latter at the Arcade.

Meanwhile at home, Mabel and Waddles are watching a TV show called "Why You Ackin' So Cray-Cray?" and Stan was fixing a jackalope and goes to get glue for it from a shelf but can't reach it. Mabel asks if she could get a ladder, but Stan gets worried and tells her that ladders are more dangerous than a loaded gun, and he tells her he owns ten guns. Mabel thinks that he has a fear of heights and tries to test him.

At the Arcade, Soos is playing a game call NORT, a parody of Tron. He then wonders what it's like to go inside a real video game, so he unscrews a side panel and climbs inside.

Dipper is then seen playing, and then losing, a game of Fight Fighters. His next quarter falls out of his hands and rolls next to the game. When goes to pick it up he notices a code "to unleash ultimate power." Dipper enters the code because "he likes things that are ultimate." The game shuts off, which he thought meant that it didn't work, but then a beam of light fires out of the machine. The game asks Dipper to "Select a character", Dipper chooses Rumble McSkirmish and then Rumble then leaps from the video game, surprising Dipper. Rumble smashes a change machine and tells Dipper he needs power-ups.

At home, Mabel tries to figure out if Stan has a fear of heights by giving him high-heels. Stan tells her that he doesn't have a fear but when he sees a skydiving show he realizes he does. In the kitchen, Dipper gives Rumble a half-eaten taco for a power-up. Rumble declares he must defeat the world's greatest Fight Fighters, then asks Dipper to take him to the Soviet Union. Dipper says that going to the Soviet Union would be tough for a number of reasons, and instead suggests that he could fight Robbie, and lies when Rumble asks if Robbie killed his father.

Rumble and Dipper then walk through town when Rumble asks Dipper his opponent's special moves. Dipper replies he doesn't need to worry about that, because after he sees Rumble he's gonna wet his pants. Rumble then says that his wet pants will be no match for a pipe that he got from punching an oil drum. Dipper tells him just to give Robbie a good scare. Rumble pulls out a sword and says "Yes! With this!" Dipper then says that the street they are walking down has dangerous litter.

Mabel then asks Stan if he wants to go for a walk while wearing a blindfold, he agrees and she takes him to the top of the water tower. In the meantime, Dipper and Rumble approach Circle Park and see Robbie. Dipper tries to call the fight off but Robbie disagrees. Dipper then sends Rumble out. Rumble tries to kill Robbie, but when Dipper tells him to stop, he says he won't stop until Robbie is dead. Dipper then goes to Barrels & Crates, Incorporated. Robbie escapes Rumble, who still won't stop. Soos, with bits of the NORT game still stuck on him, gives Dipper a ride.

At the water tower, Stan takes off his blindfold and immediately grabs the rail because he is scared. Robbie then climbs the water tower to get away from Rumble. Dipper tries to get Rumble to stop, but he doesn't listen and knocks Robbie off of the water tower. He catches him and nearly kills him, but Dipper interrupts him and reveals he lied. Rumble believes Dipper is the bad guy he needs to fight. Dipper decides to be a man and enter the fight. Rumble uses his special move, "Super Power Ninja Turbo Neo Ultra Hyper Mega Multi Alpha Meta Extra Uber Prefix COMBO," severely injuring Dipper. Rumble gloats in victory, but is erased when the "Game Over" sign appears.

Stan finally gets over his fear of heights and confirms it with a cocky dance, however Mabel now has a fear of heights. Dipper allows Robbie to beat him up, but Robbie decides not to. Wendy, who has returned from camping, asks the two if they were fighting. Dipper tells her that they were trying to stop two other people from fighting, and Wendy affectionately calls them "her boys." Dipper and Robbie then agree to hate each other in secret.

In the credits scene, a pixelated version of Gravity Falls is shown, and the player can select Dipper ("I have shorts and determination!"), Mabel, who references Mario, ("It's-a me, a-Mabel!"), Stan ("I'm slower, but I jump higher"), or Wendy ("Pick me or whatever"). Then an enlarged Pac-Man style Soos head appears and clears out the character selection. Soos then wakes up and realizes it was all a dream, then he goes back to sleep. Lastly in the credits there is a cryptogram.

