"Scary-oke" is the first episode of the second season of Gravity Falls and the 21st episode of the series overall. It premiered on August 1st, 2014, on Disney Channel.

**Official overview

The Pines family resolves to get back to normal after the Gideon-bot incident. They throw a "Mystery Shack is Back" party, but some "unwelcome" guests crash the celebration.

**Synopsis

The episode begins where "Gideon Rises" left off with Stan working on the universe portal. He reveals that he has been working on the portal for 30 years and that he is about to finally accomplish his greatest achievement. He then looks solemnly at a photograph of Dipper and Mabel on his desk, worrying they will be endangered if anyone ever finds out about his secret project, though he quickly dismisses the suspicion. He turns up the power on the machine, which causes a power surge around town (that Wendy and Gideon notice). The surge is picked up by a government satellite dish: once the location is identified, government agents are dispatched to Gravity Falls.

The following morning, Stan is awakened by his alarm clock, having fallen asleep in the lab, and remembers the Mystery Shack's grand re-opening that day. In the gift shop, he and the twins excitedly recall the circumstances of Gideon's defeat. Toby Determined comes and asks them for a picture, though Stan declines because his "camera" is a cinder block. Shandra Jimenez then arrives with a real camera, and the Pines strike a goofy pose. Stan then announces an after-party, and Mabel adds that the family will be performing karaoke together under the name Love Patrol Alpha, without Stan's and Dipper's consent. Wendy arrives to sell tickets to the tourists, with a successful response.

Stan expresses glee that things are finally going his way, with the townspeople loving him and "the Gideon smell" out of the carpet. Dipper asks for his journal back, and Stan lies that it was "too boring" to finish (though he is shown to have made copies of the pages). Though skeptical that his uncle would give up the book that quickly, he drops it and whisks Mabel off to their room. There, Dipper tells her that he is worried about not being able to crack the mysteries of the town before summer's end, and Mabel assures him that there is nothing left to uncover, but if there is, "Lord Mystery Ham" will find it.

Downstairs, Soos spots a government vehicle, prompting Stan to close the gift shop and have every tourist leave. When Agents Powers and Trigger arrive on the scene, Stan tries to steer them away and even bribe them. Dipper however excitedly greets the operatives, telling them about the journal and suggesting they work together, Powers gives him his card. Stan discredits his nephew and tells the agents the boy has an overactive imagination, prompting the officers to leave, taking Stan bobble-heads with them as "evidence." Stan proceeds to confiscate Powers' card and tells Dipper to do "normal kid stuff." Dipper is disappointed at losing his one chance at getting help with the mysteries of the town, and Mabel tries to cheer him up by reminding him of the party that night.

As the Pines family, Soos and Wendy set up the party, Mabel is overjoyed that the confetti cannon is working and that the karaoke machine has some of her favorite songs. Stan tries to get out of the planned family number by saying his voice is terrible, but Mabel reassures him that one does not need to have a good voice. While Dipper and Wendy play with a black light poster, Dipper vents about losing his opportunity to Wendy, who tells him the card is likely in Stan's room. She encourages him to try and retrieve it, with her help. They sneak off as guests begin to arrive.

Wendy keeps a lookout as Dipper rummages through Stan's belongings — some of which disturb him greatly — finds the card, and calls Powers, setting up a meeting with him. Unfortunately, Stan appears before Dipper can hang up, as Wendy got distracted by a text. As a result, Stan sends Dipper and Wendy away and retreats into the lab. While Mabel mingles, Dipper goes off to rendezvous with the agents, finally showing them the journal. Unfortunately, the agents happen upon entries like the "Stomach-faced duck" and the "Leprecorn," which they find preposterous, leading them to dismiss Dipper as a kid with an overactive imagination. Just as they are about to leave, a desperate Dipper finds and recites an incantation, which promptly causes a zombie to emerge from the ground. While its appearance finally convinces the agents, Dipper's success quickly takes a turn for the worse as more and more zombies appear, overpowering the agents and advancing towards the party. While most of the party-goers are gone before the horde reaches the Shack, mistaking the spell's backlash for an earthquake, Mabel, Dipper, and Soos remain and are quickly surrounded. Soos attempts to protect them but gets bitten almost immediately, becoming zombie-like himself and joining the rest of the zombies in running after the kids.

In the meantime, Stan is down in the lab, hard at work. He pauses to contemplate Dipper's stubbornness with some fondness but ultimately decides to put the thoughts out of his head, saying that he has too much to do to worry about the kids. Back upstairs, Dipper, Mabel and Waddles attempt to barricade themselves inside the Shack. They only manage to block the door when the zombies break in, led by zombie-Soos, who's also showed them how to get into the fuse box. Dipper fails to find anything in the journal about defeating the zombies, finally being caught by one. As the zombie raises Dipper towards his mouth, the monster is pushed down, its head promptly crushed: it is Stan, who somehow caught wind of the situation and appears to defend the twins with a bat. He sends the kids to the attic as he fights the advancing monsters with a bat and then brass knuckles, finally heading up himself to bar the door. There, he reveals that he has always known about the paranormal activity in Gravity Falls, and was denying it to keep Dipper and Mabel out of danger.

As Dipper riffles through Journal 3, horrified that it doesn't have a solution for their current situation, he happens to stand over a black light; Mabel notices that new text becomes visible, and it is discovered that the author began writing over the entries with invisible ink. The invisible text reveals that zombies can be defeated by shattering their skulls with a three-part harmony, and Mabel points out that a karaoke number is the perfect solution. The three climb onto the roof, where Mabel introduces the three as "Love Patrol Alpha", with the noise luring all the zombies (except Soos, who remained in the living room entranced by a TV show) out into the yard. She, along with a less-than-happy Dipper and Stan, begin singing "Taking Over Midnight" together. They become excited when the three-part harmony makes more and more zombie heads explode, and as the sun rises, and Mabel hits the last zombie with the confetti cannon, the Pines family stands triumphant over a field of zombie parts.

Back inside the trashed Mystery Shack, Dipper apologizes for the trouble he caused, but Mabel says he has nothing to worry about, as she greatly enjoyed the number they performed. Stan agrees to let Dipper keep the journal for self-defense purposes, so long as he does not go looking for trouble, and in return promises his nephew that he has no more "bombshell secrets"; both he and Dipper cross their fingers behind their backs, however. Stan remarks that they have a lot of cleaning up to do and inquires about his handyman, just as a still zombified Soos ambles into the den chanting "brains!" Stan tries to attack him, but Dipper stops him, having found a cure involving "a lot of formaldehyde and cinnamon." The twins push Soos into the kitchen with a chair, and Dipper expresses excitement at the idea of exploring more secrets with his new-found knowledge of the secret text in the journal. The episode ends with Dipper looking at a page that leads to a mysterious bunker that the author may have built and hid in, setting up the events of the next episode.

Meanwhile, somewhere in the woods of Gravity Falls, the battered Agents Powers and Trigger climb out of a ditch. They discuss their awe at what they've experienced and wonder whom they should report to, agreeing that Gravity Falls is indeed the town they're looking for and that they'll need to call in the "big guns.", tracking down the source at any and all costs. They suddenly bring out their guns upon seeing what appears to be another zombie, but quickly realize it is a "very ugly man": it is Toby Determined, still blindfolded and swinging a bat after failing to hit the piñata at the party in the Mystery Shack.