"Dreamscaperers" is the 19th episode of the first season of Gravity Falls. It is the first part of a two-part season finale..It premiered on July 12, 2013 on Disney Channel.

**Official overview

Dipper, Mabel and Soos must travel through Grunkle Stan's mind to defeat a tricky dream demon called Bill Cipher, summoned by Li'l Gideon.

**Synopsis

As it rains, Dipper and Mabel play a game in the attic to pass the time. Then, Stan calls them downstairs to make fun of Gideon's latest commercial. The gang proceed to recall their past experiences and their mutual dislike of him, and soon after they learn from the commercial that Gideon plans to destroy the Mystery Shack and replace it with the Tent of Telepathy. Stan assures them that Gideon will only take over if he breaks in and attempts to unlock his safe, and at that moment they hear him do just that. They confront Gideon, who initially does not take Stan seriously, but ultimately flees when Stan hits him with a broom and chases him out with it. Stan, as he locks his precious deed in the safe, defiantly says that "the combo to the safe is in the one place Gideon can't get to," which is his mind. We then see Gideon outside the shack at the window, staring in with hatred and seething rage. He turns and pulls out Journal 2. He then mutters to himself that his "mind isn't as safe as you might think, Stanford." Then, he says it's time to unleash the journal's greatest weapon: the dream demon that is Bill Cipher.

Later, as Wendy and the Pines are watching a western movie, Mabel suggests they switch the movie to Dream Boy High, which the others refuse to watch. Terrified by a bat in the kitchen, Soos rushes into the living room, and Stan sends a reluctant Dipper to take care of the problem; Dipper ends up injured after the encounter. Afterwards, Mabel and Soos tend to his injuries while Dipper complains about always having to do the hardest chores. Soos replies that Stan's personality is one of "life's great mysteries," and Soos decides to investigate another such mystery: whether or not it is possible to lick one's own elbow. Stan shortly after calls Dipper to fix the clogged sink, which angers his nephew even more.

Meanwhile, Gideon performs a ritual to summon the dream demon, Bill Cipher, who engages in various antics before making a deal with Gideon: he will invade Stan's mind, and Gideon is to help Bill with an unknown favor later on. Mabel and Soos, who witnessed the entire occurrence while hiding behind a bush, rush back to the Shack to warn Dipper, who was in the process of sweeping while his uncle slept, what they saw. Dipper consults Journal 3 and reads of the dangers of Bill, he is a very powerful and dangerous creature with two warning messages: Do not summon all costs, Never let him get in your mind. For their shock, they watch the demon descend upon Stan's mind. After learning that they can prevent Bill's chaos by traveling into Stan's head themselves, they prepare and recite the necessary incantation.

Inside Stan's mindscape, the gang explore a bit and meet Bill, who is expecting them. Mabel tries to tackle him but instead goes into and right back out of the mysterious creature. Dipper is shot with a laser by Bill; however, it doesn't actually kill him, and instead only creates a gaping hole in his stomach. Bill expresses his deal with Gideon and his power over the mind. Mabel remained skeptical, saying that he couldn't figure out what she is thinking, but is overjoyed when he brings her boy fantasy to life. After warning them, he enters the Shack in Stan's head in search of his sought out memory. After a bit of goofing around, the gang ventures into the psychological Shack to search through Stan's memories, which include: his time in Colombian jail, being a door-to-door vacuum salesman, his disastrous date with Lazy Susan, and more. While Dipper sneaks a peek at Stan's memories of him to find Stan's apparently disappointing, true feelings about him, the others—including Bill disguised as Soos—look for and find the proper door.

Bill reveals his true form, teases Mabel and Soos, and runs off with the memory, and when Dipper arrives shortly after, he expresses rage about Stan hating him. Dipper then refuses to offer further help, and the others go to confront Bill without him. As Bill is about to give Gideon the code, Mabel shoots the memory of the code out of Bill's hand and into the bottomless pit. Gideon calls off the deal, which sends Bill into a fit of extreme anger, in which he establishes an arena to face Mabel, Soos, and Mabel's dream boys with his weapon of choice: nightmares. Meanwhile, as Dipper searches for an exit, he comes across the memory of Stan expressing his actual feelings toward Dipper, and after watching the rest of the memory, learns that Stan is only hard on him to prepare him to face the world like his father did to him. Dipper is touched, but he is sucked into the memory, and the Stan within the recollection informs him of the ability to do whatever he wants within the mind.

Dipper then realizes that he must stop Bill and rushes off. As the demon is torturing Mabel and Soos with their nightmares (a British dog man for Soos, and making Mabel ugly) and prepares to finish them off once and for all, Dipper arrives with the news of being able to make dreams reality and demonstrates the ability to his comrades via laser vision. Mabel decides to give herself the ability to shoot kitten heads from her arms, Soos utilizes a question mark beam from his stomach, and so forth. Just as Soos, the twins, and Mabel's dream boys are about to send Bill out of Stan's head, he stops them. He tells them they are clever and decides to let them live, thinking they will come in handy later. He then warns them of an approaching evil, and that one day everything they care about will change, but until then he'll be watching them very closely for the time being and leaves. Stan wakes up and thereby forces Soos and the twins out of his head. They are relieved to have gotten rid of Bill. Unfortunely, their relief is cut short as Gideon reveals after Bill failed his mission he used dynamite to obtain the deed to the Shack, which gives him ownership according to Gravity Falls' odd laws, and forces the "trespassers" out as he has Bud destroy the building. The credits convey the message of "to be continued", in A1Z26.