"Weirdmageddon 3: Take Back The Falls" is the 20th and 21st episodes of the second season of Gravity Falls, the 40th and 41st episodes overall, and the one-hour series finale. It premiered February 15, 2016 at 7:00 PM on Disney XD and February 19, 2016 at 9:00 PM on Disney Channel.

This is the third and final episode in the Weirdmageddon story arc. The second half of the episode is broadcast as a fourth episode titled "Weirdmageddon 4: Somewhere in The Woods" in subsequent re-airings for half-hour programming.

**Official overview

Ford discovers Bill Cipher's true motives, the Mystery Shack crew forms a plan to fight back. A final confrontation with Bill leads to the Pines family's ultimate fate and greatest sacrifice.

**Synopsis:

**Part 1

Dipper, Mabel, Wendy, and Soos barge into the Mystery Shack to be greeted by the remaining refugees of Gravity Falls, including Stan Pines, Old Man McGucket, Pacifica Northwest, other townsfolk and mysterious creatures of the town. Dipper and Mabel are happy to see Stan, and they hug him with Soos and Wendy. The twins question why everyone is hiding out in the Shack, but before they can get an answer, an Eye-Bat sweeps the outside of the Shack, forcing everyone to hide once more.

Once the coast is clear, Stan shows Dipper and Mabel life in the Shack. The situation seems rather grim for the survivors; many of them are injured and food is becoming scarce. Stan shares his story to the twins: he was working outside when Weirdmageddon struck, and sought refuge in the Shack. He learned that the unicorn hair, Mercury and Moonstone barrier that Dipper and Ford set up around the Shack protected it from weirdness waves and all things related to Weirdmageddon. When McGucket showed up near the Shack with the refugees, Stan elected himself chief of Gravity Falls due to Tyler Cutebiker's absence and let them stay. His current plan is to hide out in the Shack until they run out of food, with eating the gnomes as a backup plan.

Dipper informs Stan that Ford has been captured by Bill and that they cannot just stay cooped up in the Shack. Stan grudgingly shrugs the issue off, believing that Ford has to get himself out of the mess he made. Stan insists everyone will be fine in the Shack, and thinks that the rest of the townspeople will be fine on their own. However, a news broadcast from Shandra Jimenez inside the Fearamid shows the throne made out of petrified townspeople to the survivors for the first time. The refugees are shocked to see their loved ones turned to stone.

While the refugees are discouraged, Mabel and Dipper try and inspire them to fight back to save their friends, saying that Bill wants them to run and hide. Dipper says that Ford knows Bill's secret weakness. If all of the refugees band together, they can rescue Ford, find Bill's weakness, and save the town. The refugees are optimistic, but Stan objects on the grounds that the Shack is the only place safe from Bill and that there's no way to bring it to him. This gives McGucket an idea, but he says it will require everyone to work together. He puts on his goggles and begins to share a plan while Stan looks on uncomfortably.

Inside the Fearamid, Ford is freed from his petrified state inside a private study and chained to the floor. Bill Cipher rises up from the ground, playing a piano. He explains Ford is at a penthouse suite in the tip of the Fearamid. Ford deduces that Bill wants something from him. Bill explains that with his newfound powers, he can control all of space, matter and time. He also reveals that he originated from an interdimensional region known as the second dimension until he destroyed it and is aiming to do the same to this one. The only problem is that he, along with the rest of his friends, cannot escape Gravity Falls. Ford thinks that this is due to a natural magnetism attracting weirdness to Gravity Falls, the event he's studied for years, a force so strong that it forms a barrier that prevents that weirdness from going outside the town. He says there's an equation to break this barrier, but he'd never tell Bill. Bill tries to persuade Ford by telling offering him unlimited power in a world without restrictions or laws. Ford tells Bill he's insane if he thinks he'll help him, to which Bill laughs and declares he's insane anyway, so he decides to enter Ford's mind and look for the equation, but Ford reminds him of the rules: Bill can haunt Ford's dreams, but he cannot enter his mind unless Ford shakes his hand and allows him in. Bill decides to try and find Ford's weakness and force him to make the deal, chaining him up further.

Back in the Shack, McGucket reveals the blueprints for his newest robotic invention. While the twins and the other survivors are impressed, Stan remains pessimistic. In spite of the odds, all of the refugees band together to assemble McGucket's giant mech using various materials found inside the Shack and elsewhere in the surrounding area.

Having made a flag for their resistance, the refugees sit outside around a bonfire. Mabel has knit special apocalypse sweaters for everyone, including a llama sweater for Pacifica which she begrudgingly wears. Mabel thinks that they might have a shot at defeating Bill. Dipper laments that the only birthday present he wants is to survive the summer. Soos assures Dipper that if they live, the entire town will throw Dipper and Mabel a birthday party. Dipper cheers up and wonders where Stan is. Stan is away from the crowd, ranting to Shmebulock about how the resistance's plan is garbage and how no one is listening to him. When Dipper and Mabel ask Stan what's wrong, he shares his feelings about the plan. He doesn't want to save Ford, as he's still upset that Ford never thanked him for rescuing him. Stan does not understand why Ford is still called a hero, when it was Ford who brought Weirdmageddon in the first place. Dipper says that Ford is a hero because he did not want to hide, but Stan retorts that if Ford hid, then he would still be alive. Mabel breaks up the conflict, assuring everyone their plan will work.

The next day, everyone gathers inside the Shack with McGucket hoping his invention works. Dipper pulls a lever inside the Shack, causing mechanisms to activate that turn the entire Mystery Shack into a gigantic mech. The mech walks past some other survivors on its way to the Fearamid, where it's shown that in the throne room, Bill and his friends are torturing Ford by blasting him with lasers. Ford is in pain, but doesn't give in. Before Bill can start torturing Ford again, a dinosaur head busts through the door of the Fearamid, outraging Bill. Soos steps out onto a platform on the mech, dubbing it the Shack-tron. Bill finds it adorable the refugees are fighting back, and orders his henchmen to fight them. They increase their size and jump out of the Fearamid, ready to fight. Stan thinks the plan was a bad idea.

Soos tells the henchmen to hand over Ford, or else they will fight. The henchmen immediately rush towards the Shack-tron to battle. Inside the Shack-tron, the refugees control various mechanisms that control different parts of the actual mech, using weapons to fight against the henchmen. Rumble McSkirmish and Wendy attack outside the Shack-tron, with Rumble attacking from afar and Wendy piloting a rogue Eye-Bat to turn the henchmen to stone. Stan desperately tries to find an exit. Zanthar rushes the Shack-tron, pushing it through several stone walls. Using all of their power, the refugees control the Shack-tron to throw Zanthar into the distant mountains, subduing the henchmen.

Bill is annoyed as Ford congratulates Dipper and Mabel for their efforts. Bill realizes Ford cares about the twins and wonders if torturing them will be more effective than torturing Ford, who is petrified again as Bill flies over to the Shack-tron and attempts to crush it with a giant fist. However, it remains intact thanks to the unicorn barrier. Bill becomes enraged and repeatedly punches the Shack-tron. The refugees use the dinosaur arm to tear out Bill's eye and distract him. Realizing now is their chance to rescue Ford, a team composed of the twins, Stan, Soos, McGucket, Wendy, Pacifica, and Sheriff Blubs, is ejected out of the Shack-tron, using parachutes made of Mabel's sweaters to land inside the Fearamid.

Everyone lands right next to the human throne. Mabel travels up the human throne using her grappling hook and finds the petrified Ford. Stan yells at her to take Ford and leave, but Dipper says they do not know how to unpetrify him. Gideon Gleeful, trapped in a cage hanging from the ceiling, says he knows how to restore everyone. He is dressed up in a sailor costume and explains that Bill forced him to dance for all of eternity as punishment for betraying him. Gideon says that Tyler Cutebiker is the load-bearing statue in the human throne, and if he is pulled out, the throne will fall apart. When Dipper does so, the throne breaks up and everyone is turned back to normal. In the chaos, Gideon's cage is knocked to the ground and he's freed.

Wendy and Pacifica reunite with their families and Blubs does the same with Deputy Durland. All the citizens are happy to be freed, and Ford is un-petrified as well. He meets McGucket for the first time since he left Ford. McGucket decides to forgive Ford, hugging it out. Stan gruffly greets Ford as well. Dipper and Mabel ask Ford what Bill's weakness is. He puts on some gloves and asks for something to write with. The only thing he gets is a blue spray can, but decides it will do. He begins spray-painting a circle on the floor and ends up creating the Zodiac, complete with its ten symbols.

Ford explains that the Wheel is a prophecy. He found a drawing of the Wheel on the wall of a cave many years ago. He recognized some of the symbols then, and recognizes all of them now. It was prophesied that the symbols would create a force that could defeat Bill and reverse his weirdness. Ford dismissed it as superstition at first, but realizes now it's destiny. Ford tells Dipper to go to the pine tree and Mabel to go to the shooting star. Soos steps onto the question mark and Robbie walks onto the heart. Gideon goes to the pentagram, the sign for the Tent of Telepathy.

Meanwhile, Bill is still fighting the Shack-tron, having regenerated his eye. It manages to pin Bill to the ground, but Bill realizes its legs aren't inside the unicorn barrier. Bill utilizes this weak spot to flip the Shack-tron over, tear off a leg, and smash it into the Shack-tron, sending it flying. Back in the Fearamid, Ford tells everyone in the Wheel to hold hands. When Dipper wonders who the bag of ice represents, Ford explains that some of the symbols are metaphors. The ice is someone cool in the face of danger, causing Wendy to walk onto the symbol after encouragement from her friends. When Ford says the spectacles are someone scholarly, McGucket steps forward. Pacifica walks onto the llama, as her sweater matches it. Ford himself goes to the six-fingered hand. Everyone holds hands, creating a ring of energy that surrounds the Wheel and envelops the Fearamid with dark clouds. All the other citizens rush out of the room.

Ford realizes there is only one person left to join the Wheel: Stan. Ford yells at Stan to join the wheel, but Stan questions whether the plan could destroy Bill. Everyone gets upset at Stan, telling him to join. Stan tells everyone that he isn't the enemy and that it was Ford who brought Bill into Gravity Falls. Ford apologizes and pleads to Stan one more time. Stan finally agrees, but asks Ford to say "thank you", Ford is surprised to hear Stan's request and Stan reminds him that he spent 30 years trying to return him to their dimension and he never thanked him. Ford finally thanks Stan, Stan finally joins the Wheel and declares "Between me and him, I'm not always the bad twin.", but Ford declares that it is said "him and me." and bothers Stan by telling him that he must improve his grammar, Stan gets upset and grabs Ford, breaking the link. Stan and Ford start fighting and Dipper and Mabel try to stop them. While they're distracted, Bill looms above them, having beaten the Shack-tron.

**Part 2

Bill mocks the resistance, happy that everyone who could pose a threat to him is in one spot. He sends a wave of fire at them, burning the Wheel away. He also traps Stan and Ford, binding them with ropes. The resistance prepares to fight against Bill, saying they are not afraid of him. Stating they should be, Bill snaps his fingers and turns everyone but the Pines into tapestries that show their screaming faces, to prove himself as a threat not to be taken lightly. Bill then imprisons Dipper and Mabel in a pyramidal cell. Bill says he'll spare the twins if Ford tells him the equation to remove the barrier surrounding the town, giving him one last opportunity. Dipper yells at Ford not to do it and Mabel adds that Bill makes bad deals, Bill turns around angrily and tells Mabel not to try to play with him and that he can see everything, then Mabel quickly takes out her spray can and sprays Bill's eye, making Bill scream in pain and ask why people always do that, distracting him again and freeing Stan and Ford.

While Bill is distracted, Dipper takes out his size-altering flashlight and enlarges the cell, making it so him and Mabel can walk through. Dipper yells at Stan and Ford to run, saying he and Mabel will take care of Bill. When Ford expresses disbelief, Dipper says to trust him. The kids goad Bill into chasing them down a long hallway. As Bill moves to follow them, Stan and Ford try to go for the kids. However, Bill places them inside a pyramidal cell, he changes into a monstrous red and yellow form and tells Stan and Ford that he will turn the kids into corpses. Bill leaves and chases the kids all over the Fearamid. Bill angrily yells at the kids that when he puts his hands on them, he will disassemble their molecules and declares in rage that they tricked him for the last time, but Dipper and Mabel use their grappling hook to escape up a chute, with Bill close behind.

Stan feels bad about the situation and thinks that the kids will die for his fault and thinks that he is a screw-up like their father said. Ford tells Stan not to be so hard on himself and that it was him who made the deal with Bill in the first place and that Stan would have easily recognized that Bill was a cheater. Stan and Ford lament their relationship, Ford remembers that they were like Dipper and Mabel and wonders how they work together even though the world is ending, to which Stan tells him that it is because they are children and it is the best they know. Ford decides to let Bill enter his mind, as even if the universe will be doomed, there might be a chance Bill will let Dipper and Mabel live. Ford says that if he didn't have the metal plate in his head, Stan could wipe Ford's mind and that would destroy Bill. Stan wonders what would happen if Bill went in his mind, but Ford says there is nothing Bill wants in there. Ford remains adamant in his decision, as it is all they have left.

Meanwhile, Dipper and Mabel run into a dead end. Mabel uses the size-altering flashlight to enlarge her hand, punching a hole through the wall and into the outside. Dipper moves to round up the refugees, but sees that Bill's henchmen have done that first. While Dipper and Mabel watch, Bill sneaks up behind them and brings them back with Stan and Ford. Bill tells Ford his time is up, he tells him that he has the kids and decides to kill one, Bill randomly chooses which one to kill and chooses Mabel and raises his hand to snap his fingers and eliminate her, but then Ford surrenders as Stan objects. Bill removes the cell and ties up Stan. Ford's only condition to the deal is that Bill lets Stan, Dipper and Mabel go, to which Bill accepts, Dipper tells him not to do it, but Ford shakes Bill's hand and they make the deal. Bill's physical form turns to stone as his mental form goes inside Ford's mind.

Ford's mind is a white landscape with a single wooden door. When Bill opens it, he is greeted with Stan playing paddleball inside the Mystery Shack! Stan reveals he and Ford swapped clothes and pretended to be each other so that Bill would enter the wrong mind.

In the real world, Ford takes off Stan's fez and takes out the Memory Gun, he writes "Stanley Pines" and feeling bad about what he has to do, pulls the trigger. In the mindscape, Bill tries to call the deal off as the door shuts and the room becomes enveloped in blue fire from the gun's effects. Stan explains his memory is going to be wiped with Bill inside his mind. Bill starts to panic just as Stan tells him that his biggest mistake was choosing to mess with his family. Bill tries to escape and resorts to bargaining with Stan, but Stan does not budge. Bill’s form heavily glitches out as he speaks a backwards chant. Stan punches the weakened Bill into shattered pieces as his memory is completely wiped for good, happy he was good for something after all.

In the real world, with Stan's memory completely wiped, everyone is freed from the tapestries. Outside the Fearamid, Bill's henchmen are sucked back into the interdimensional rift, with the disassembling Fearamid not far behind. The rift itself is then sealed off and explodes into a great shockwave, restoring the entirety of Gravity Falls back to its former glory. The only thing that remains of Weirdmageddon is Bill's permanently petrified physical form.

Stan regains consciousness in the forest as Dipper, Mabel, and Ford run to him. Unfortunately, Stan does not remember who any of them are. As Mabel desperately attempts to jog Stan's memory, Ford sadly explains that Stan sacrificed his memories to save everyone, and that he is their hero as he consoles him. The quartet, along with Soos, begin to walk towards the now-ruined Mystery Shack. Dipper and Mabel try to remind Stan of the Mystery Shack and themselves, but Stan still does not remember anyone. Dipper wonders if saving the world was worth it if Stan does not remember his friends and family. Mabel tries to find something to bring Stan's memory back and eventually stumbles across her scrapbook.

Mabel sits down with Stan and begins sharing the stories and memories of her time at Gravity Falls with him. Dipper and Mabel try to frantically remind Stan of the summer, but Stan can't remember it. As Waddles jumps onto Stan's lap, Stan involuntarily calls Waddles by his real name, even though he shouldn't remember it. Ford realizes the scrapbook is working as Stan also calls Soos by his name. Dipper and Mabel continue to show Stan more activities in the summer, showing him all of the things Stan did with them. Everyone begins to laugh, and even Stan joins in as he puts his arms around the twins.

Life in Gravity Falls is back to normal. Shandra shares a news report, expressing happiness that Gravity Falls is back to normal after the events of Weirdmageddon. Some lingering Eye-Bats remain on Sprott's farm and zombies pop up in the cemetery as the Valentinos bury them back in their graves. Mayor Tyler gives a speech to the townsfolk to announce the "Never Mind All That" Act, created in response to Weirdmageddon. The act proposes that if anyone asks what happened to Gravity Falls in the past few days, the people must respond with "never mind all that" or risk being tased. Sheriff Blubs and Deputy Durland go mad with power and, it seems, love.

Shandra also reports that the Northwest family has gone broke. After Preston Northwest pledged allegiance to Bill and placed all of his money in "weirdness bonds," he had to sell the family mansion to preserve his family's fortune. On the bright side, McGucket regained all of his memory and has made millions of dollars patenting his inventions. He decides to buy Northwest Manor with his newfound money. In addition, Stan has fully regained his memory and is throwing a party to celebrate Dipper and Mabel's 13th birthday and last day in Gravity Falls. Shandra closes the broadcast with Bodacious T announcing a new sport called "death ball."

At the Mystery Shack, Stan, Ford, Soos, Wendy, Candy Chiu, and Grenda finish singing Happy Birthday to Dipper and Mabel. The entire town has gathered at the Shack to celebrate as well. Mayor Tyler says it's the least the town could do to thank the Pines for all they've done. Gideon says that thanks to the twins, he'll no longer be evil and will open up his heart. It's then shown that he tries to be a "normal" kid, but only succeeds in being bullied. Gideon then sics Ghost-Eyes and his other prison buddies on the bullies for revenge.

Soos tells Dipper and Mabel to make a wish. Dipper says that on his first day at the town, he would have wished for adventure, mystery and friends, but he now realizes he has all of that already. Mabel's wish would be to shrink everyone down and take them home, but decides on something more feasible: having everyone sign her scrapbook. Mabel swears to never forget anyone in Gravity Falls, and destroys the memory gun to prove it. Mabel and Dipper then blow out the candles on their birthday cake. Wendy declares the twins to officially be technically teenagers, causing her and her friends to chant enthusiastically.

Pacifica tells Dipper and Mabel to open the presents she gift-wrapped for them. They begin holding up their presents as Ford calls Stan away to talk to him privately. Ford says that he has detected strange anomalies in the middle of the Arctic Ocean. He wants to investigate, but doesn't want to do it alone. He personally asks Stan to come with him and give him a second chance, living the adventures they wished they had when they were younger. Stan agrees to the offer. When Ford wonders what to do with the Mystery Shack, Stan comes up with an idea and whispers it to Ford while Soos eavesdrops in horror.

As Dipper and Mabel look at their presents, Stan prepares an announcement. He says that due to his oncoming adventures with Ford, he will be closing down the Mystery Shack for good. The town is shocked as Soos runs on stage and speaks against Stan. He feels that the Mystery Shack is a place that fuels people's dreams and imagination, and if it is shut down, then people's dreams will be shut down with it. Stan says there will not be anybody to run the Shack in his absence, but then realizes that Soos would be the perfect replacement. Stan gives Soos his fez, proclaiming that the Mystery Shack is under new management and Abuelita moves in almost immediately.

The time then comes for Dipper and Mabel to go back home where their completely cleared out bedroom is shown (with part of Mabel's headboard ruined presumably due to the destruction caused by Bill) and they are at the bus stop with Stan, Ford, Soos, Wendy, Candy and Grenda. Mabel says it's time to move on from Gravity Falls, wishing goodbye to Candy and Grenda. Mabel wishes goodbye to Stan as well, happy he's wearing a goodbye sweater she made for him. Wendy wishes Dipper goodbye as well, telling him that he means a lot to her. She exchanges their hats so they each have something to remember each other by. Wendy also gives him a letter for him to read the next time he misses Gravity Falls.

Finally, the last bus leaving Gravity Falls pulls up to the stop. Mabel realizes she's said goodbye to everyone except Waddles. Mabel tries leaving him behind, tearfully explaining that her and Dipper's parents probably won't let her keep him as a pet at their home in California. Waddles tries following Mabel, much to her anguish, but Stan (hating to see her so sad) says that if he had to tolerate Waddles all summer, then Mabel and Dipper's parents now have to as well. He forces Waddles onto the bus and tells the driver that Waddles has to be allowed to ride with the twins. When the driver explains that no animals are allowed on the bus, Stan and Ford flash weapons at him, convincing him to let Waddles on.

Dipper and Mabel hug Stan, saying they'll miss him. Before stepping onto the bus, Dipper asks Mabel if she feels ready for the unknown, she responds that she doesn't and the twins step on as ready as they could be. As the bus drives away, Dipper and Mabel wave to all their friends, they wave back running with the bus as much as they can. Dipper and Mabel look out the window of the bus. Various creatures wave at the bus after the people as it drives away. Dipper begins a voiceover much like the one he did in the first episode, talking about the mysteries of Gravity Falls. He encourages those who are curious about the town to come visit it and find their own adventure. Mabel falls asleep on the bus almost instantly, indicating that she might not really be so worried about entering the unknown even though she said she doesn't feel ready.

At some point in the future, McGucket officially moves into Northwest Manor. Soos runs the Mystery Shack with Melody as his assistant. He wears Stan's old costume and has made a statue of him in his honor, although the scariness of the statue frightens away the children present at the statue's unveiling in the Mystery Shack. Stan and Ford pilot a boat in the ocean, fighting a giant squid. The boat is revealed to be named the 'Stan O' War II'. Back in the present, Dipper opens the letter Wendy gave him and it reads "see you next summer" signed by all of his and Mabel's friends from the town, Dipper's spirits lift as the bus leaves Gravity Falls and the credits roll.

During the credits, photos are shown of Dipper and Mabel's various adventures with their friends in Gravity Falls. Some miscellaneous revelations are included, like the third and fourth Dipper clones from "Double Dipper" are still alive and using raincoats to protect them from rain and Quentin Trembley is still roaming around backwards on a horse. The credits end with a photo of the Mystery Twins and their pig on the bus back in Piedmont, California, by which time Dipper and Waddles had both fallen asleep as well.

After the credits, Bill's petrified physical form is shown in live action; isolated deep in a forest, which would begin the genesis of the Cipher Hunt.