"The Stanchurian Candidate" is the 14th episode of the second season of Gravity Falls and the 34th episode overall. It premiered on August 24, 2015 on Disney XD.

**Official overview

When Grunkle Stan decides to run for mayor, Dipper and Mabel have their work cut out for them trying to turn their gaffe-prone uncle into the perfect candidate.

**Synopsis

Stan wakes up in pain, finding his slippers soaked in milk. A note from Mabel explains she used them to carry her milk. He switches on the kitchen light, but the bulb explodes. Inside a box replacing it, he finds a note from Dipper saying he used all the lights to make a planetarium suit for Soos.

Stan rushes to Tons Grocery Store to buy a new light bulb pack. Robbie, Lee, Nate, and Tambry mock him in the checkout aisle, prompting Stan to threaten to shoplift. The cashier calls security, and Stan tries to escape with a smoke bomb that fails. He returns home bruised with the light bulb pack, but Ford replaced it with a long-lasting bulb that softens their skin. Infuriated, Stan watches the local news and learns that Mayor Befufftlefumpter has died, and there's an afternoon meeting to choose a new mayor.

Later that day, the Gravity Falls townspeople have gathered at town hall. Sheriff Blubs reveals the mayoral requirements: casting a shadow, counting to ten, and throwing a hat into a hoop. Bud Gleeful confidently throws his hat in, but Stan challenges him after hearing Dipper and Mabel's desire for Ford's election. Stan questions the town's decision to let Bud win, and several townspeople throw their hats in the ring. Bud warns Stan that he'd let bygones be bygones, but his hand has been forced.

Dipper and Mabel are concerned about Stan's mayoral campaign and believe he's unsuitable. Despite this, the Mystery Shack promotes his campaign. Stan's disastrous radio interview is interrupted by Dipper and Mabel. Dipper seeks Ford's help in the basement, where he receives a pair of mind-controlling ties. If Dipper wears one and Stan the other, Dipper can influence Stan's actions. After testing the tie on Soos, they decide to use it on Stan to shape his campaign, making him popular. Stan delivers a speech about America, Freedom, and "Amerifreedom," unaware of the control. Dipper and Mabel keep Stan wearing the tie by claiming it's his "lucky tie."

Meanwhile, Bud struggles to understand his campaign's success while Stan thrives. He seeks advice from his "campaign manager," Gideon, whom he's kept in touch with from prison. A very enraged Gideon scold him telling him he is not having a good day in prison, he tells him to win the elections to get out of prison, but Bud says Stan is going good, so Gideon decides to cheat, uses a last resort: a one-use possession spell from Journal 2 to possess Bud secretly.

On the final debate day, Stan forgoes his lucky tie, leading to an argument with Dipper. Dipper reveals the tie's power, causing an infuriated Stan to leave. Realizing they need an independent candidate, Soos emerges from the bathroom, wearing the tie. Stan is surprised to see Soos and becomes enraged when he spots Dipper and Mabel behind the curtain, controlling the tie. His approval ratings plummet, and his anger grows.

Bud uses Gideon's charisma to convince the crowd to vote for him as an intermission is called. Dipper and Mabel wonder why Bud acts like Gideon. For the twins' surprise, they see Gideon in a screen on Bud, realizing he was behind this, he was controlling Bud. Gideon, controlling Bud, grabs them and forces them to tie up in the statue's nostrils filled with dynamite. Meanwhile, Stan is being booed by the audience which makes Bud win more audience, he feels sorry about what he's done, saying he should have listened to the twins before until he hears Dipper and Mabel's screams in danger as they are about to fall out. Stan rushes to save them, punching eagles to climb the scaffolding. Impressed, the townspeople throw birdseed at him, choosing the candidate with the most for the freedom eagle's mayor. Stan grabs the kids as the rope breaks and pulls them back in. Stan apologizes to his niece and nephew for his stubborn behavior, the kids also apologize for not supporting him before, he wins more audience to Bud's shock. Gideon, angry for losing, forces Bud to push the detonator. Stan grabs the kids and they leap out as the statue explodes. They land safely in birdseed as the crowd flees. The freedom eagle leaves its cage, kisses Stan, and declares him mayor. The townspeople cheer as Gideon is angry his plan failed.

Stan's short-lived success is thwarted when his criminal record is revealed, disqualifying him from being mayor. Tyler, the only eligible candidate, wins. The news airs Stan's record. Dipper is disappointed, but Stan's fine. Mabel gives him a "Our Hero" sash, making him tear up. They soon leave to vandalize Mayor Tyler's mansion.

In prison, Gideon befriends Ghost-Eyes, who invites him to a riot. Gideon declines and returns to his cell. He removes a cat poster to display a Bill Cipher summoning circle. With looks like The Zodiac. Drawing an eye in the triangle, he completes the circle and says he's ready to make a deal as it glows.