
"Carpet Diem" is the 16th episode of the first season of Gravity Falls. It premiered on April 5, 2013 on Disney Channel.

**Official overview

When Dipper discovers a hidden room inside the Mystery Shack, he is happy to claim it as his own space, but there is one problem- Mabel wants the room too. The duo compete to win the room with a contest that gets even trickier when they learn the room's carpet has electric body swapping properties.

**Synopsis

Dipper and Mabel play "attic stuff mini-golf" before Mabel's alarm clock goes off. Though Dipper is disappointed that Mabel's spending another night with Candy and Grenda, he's horrified to learn Mabel's friends will stay at the Mystery Shack. Mabel, Candy, and Grenda have sleepover activities, and Dipper gets annoyed and leaves to find another place to sleep, considering Soos' horrible break room, which is just an electrical panel with hardly enough room for a person to fit, until deciding to sleep outside despite a wolf biting his leg and an owl trying to eat his tongue.

Mabel and her friends wake up the next morning, confused about their memories from the night before. After Candy and Grenda leave, Dipper confronts Mabel about her frequent sleepovers. They argue and agree to get separate bedrooms. Despite Stan's claim of insufficient space, Soos finds a hidden room. Stan takes advantage of the situation, having the twin who sucks up to him the most get the room. They earn "Suck-up Points" by doing chores like tying shoes and putting shingles on the roof in extreme heat. Dipper relaxes, confident he'll get the room, and rubs his socks on the floor, building static electricity. The twins argue again. Dipper hits Mabel's hand, causing them to swap bodies. They freak out.

After Dipper and Mabel realize the experimental carpet swapped them due to static electricity, they devise a plan to sabotage their uncle's view of each other while in each other's bodies. Mabel (Dipper) makes Stan a rock sandwich while Dipper (Mabel) sings a song about breaking stuff. Stan, confused, is left wondering what happened. Meanwhile, Waddles rolls around on the electron carpet while Soos, who wants to be a pig, cleans and comes to pet him, swapping them. Wendy walks in to find Waddles in Soos' body starting to eat a T-shirt, then leaves, finding it weird. Candy and Grenda arrive for another sleepover, mistaking Dipper (Mabel) for Mabel and rejecting her request to talk. Dipper (Mabel) tries to escape, but Grenda suggests reading a romance novel about a werewolf. Dipper (Mabel) spies on them through the keyhole, but Stan discovers her and thinks Dipper is spying on the girls, leading to a talk about the birds and the bees. Downtown, Soos enjoys being Waddles until Old Man McGucket arrives to eat him. Sheriff Blubs and Deputy Durland read their horoscopes from their car.

After Stan finishes reading "Why Am I Sweaty?" to Mabel, she's scared and tries to sabotage Dipper, but ends up winning him the room instead by calling Stan a jerk. Dipper has to sit through girly activities with Mabel's friends, and the chase between McGucket and Soos continues. Mabel tells Dipper he won the room, but locks herself in when she realizes he needs the key. Dipper enlists Candy and Grenda's help by giving him a makeover, but they start swapping bodies after learning about the carpet's properties. Meanwhile, Waddles unintentionally gives Soos a raise and attracts a female passerby.

As more people enter the secret room, body swapping occurs. The twins ensure they're themselves and run to the attic to fight over the basement bedroom key. They realize neither wanted to move out and understand their motives. After everyone returns to their bodies, Soos learns being a pig wasn't as great as he thought, discovering Waddles has a beautiful fiancée and a raise. Dipper moves into his new room, where Stan disposes of the Electron Carpet. Dipper and Mabel realize they're not seeing each other. Dipper gives Soos his old bedroom and moves back with Mabel. Meanwhile, Soos confuses his fiancée about not knowing anything and asks her to resume kissing.