"Dipper vs. Manliness" is the sixth episode of the first season of Gravity Falls. It premiered on July 20, 2012 on Disney Channel.

**Official overview

When Dipper decides he needs to learn to "be a man," he wanders into the forest on a quest to attain manliness...and encounters danger, tests of bravery and a giant talking bear. Meanwhile, Mabel tries to teach Stan how to be attractive to women.

**Synopsis

The episode starts at the Mystery Shack. Tyler wants to get his Christmas shopping done early this year, and is searching for something that represents the holiday. Dipper and Mabel are hungry and they ask Grunkle Stan to take them to Greasy's Diner. They end up locking Tyler in the store because they don't want to wait for him to make up his mind. At the diner, Grunkle Stan orders a split plate, with a plate of ketchup for Dipper and a cup of salad dressing for Mabel since he wants to save money. Mabel wants pancakes, but Grunkle Stan doesn't want to splurge. Dipper declares that he is going to win everybody free pancakes by beating the manliness tester, but Mabel and Grunkle Stan just laugh at him. Grunkle Stan makes fun of Dipper, citing an incident where he found Dipper in the bathroom singing "Disco Girl" into a comb. Dipper then attempts to win the free pancakes but fails. A card comes out that says, "You are a cutie patootie!" to the sound of a baby laughing and nursery music playing in the background. Manly Dan is able to effortlessly beat the machine with just his pinky pushing the manhandle, and wins free pancakes for everyone in the diner.

Dipper then leaves the diner in order to prove Mabel and Grunkle Stan wrong, but he is greeted by a busted fire hydrant that Sheriff Blubs and Deputy Durland run around in circles in, which drenches him. He then backs up into a woman who was looking for a mailman, which Dipper interprets as "male man", causing him to run off into the forest crying with embarrassment. He is then seen eating Real Man Jerky and doing bench presses with a small twig, when all of a sudden the ground beneath him begins to shake. A herd of forest animals run past Dipper followed by Manly Dan, who tells Dipper to run for his life. Dipper hides behind a log where a huge Manotaur named Chutzpar, "summoned" by the smell of Dipper's beef jerky, arrives. Chutzpar then roars, grabs a nearby deer to use as a backscratcher, throws it, and then finds Dipper, asking him if he was "gonna finish" his jerky. Chutzpar can smell that Dipper has emotional issues and Dipper tells the Manotaur that he has man-related problems. Dipper sees how manly the Manotaur is and asks for some pointers. Chutzpar agrees and tells Dipper to climb on his back hair. He then takes Dipper to the Man Cave, where there is an entire group of Manotaurs doing various manly things. Dipper introduces himself as Dipper the Destructor. The group initially rejects Dipper, but decide to train him after he uses reverse psychology.

Meanwhile, Mabel is trying to help Stan to get Lazy Susan to like him, with the help of Wendy and Soos. Then Dipper is given the task to bring back the Multi-Bear's head to the leader of the Manotaurs. Once done he will be a man. Dipper goes to do his task and meanwhile, Mabel takes Stan to Lazy Susan at Greasy's to admit his imperfections, then Lazy Susan goes away to get her phone number for Stan.

Soon, Dipper finds the Multi-Bear and defeats him. However, the bear asks Dipper if he could grant his last wish before he dies. Dipper agrees and the Multi-Bear points to a tiny radio in the corner of its cave, asking Dipper to play the tape already in it. Dipper turns it on and the Multi-Bear reveals that his favorite song is Disco Girl. Realizing that the Manotaurs bullied the Multi-Bear because he likes this song (which is a sign of girliness), Dipper decides just to let the Multi-Bear live. He tells the Manotaurs that it's horrifying to kill the Multi-Bear because he's a really nice guy and that they're a bunch of jerks if they want him to do it. The Manotaurs leave him saying that Dipper will never become a man, and he goes back to Greasy's Diner to tell Grunkle Stan and Mabel what had happened.

