"Dipper and Mabel vs. the Future" is the 17th episode of the second season of Gravity Falls and the 37th episode overall. It premiered on October 12, 2015 on Disney XD. This episode serves as the prelude to the Weirdmageddon story arc.

**Official overview

Mabel decides to plan for her and Dipper's 13th birthday party. Meanwhile, Dipper ventures below the town to find its most shocking secret.

**Synopsis

The episode begins with Mabel waking Dipper up in the attic of the Mystery Shack. Having a pair of googly-eyes on her chin, Mabel talks as "Mr. Upsidedownington," leaning over Dipper, who tells Mabel that she has not done that since third grade. Mabel reminds Dipper that their 13th birthday (which is August 31st, the last day of summer) is only one week away, which Dipper had hardly realized. Suddenly, Soos and Grunkle Stan enter the room, with both of them talking about events happening in the near future. Soos remarks on how the future is coming for them all and everyone echoes him.

Dipper and Mabel head downstairs to begin planning, with Mabel believing that the big birthday party will be thrown at the Mystery Shack. However, Stan says they are not allowed to have another party at the Shack after the events of "Scary-oke." Soos recommends the Gravity Falls High School gym as a good place to have the party. The twins are about to head there together, but Ford calls Dipper over, saying his face is on fire.

Dipper runs to help Ford, but he has everything under control. He then shows Dipper something extremely urgent - the containment of the interdimensional rift is becoming unstable. He then explains that if Bill Cipher manages to get the rift once the containment completely deteriorates, he would unleash a catastrophic event that will unravel reality. Ford had dubbed this event called Weirdmageddon. Dipper is hesitant, wondering what he should do with Mabel and his birthday party. Mabel walks in, telling Dipper that he can go on his quest with Ford, and saying that the two of them can stay in touch using walkie-talkies. Ford runs off, telling Dipper to hurry. Dipper psyches himself up for his first mission with Ford and promptly walks into the doorframe before actually heading out the door. The two of them go on a quest to patch the rift, and Ford will explain the exact nature of his plan along the way.

Mabel and Soos head to Gravity Falls High School, where Lee and Nate are rearranging the letters on the school's sign. The two go into the gym, finding lines of despondent high-schoolers. Mabel finds Wendy and asks her what's happening. Wendy explains that it is registration day and that no one is happy about it. Mabel is confused, thinking high school is fun and song-filled, just like in fiction. Wendy says that portrayal is false and that if Mabel can avoid growing up, she should. Everyone in the gym promptly laughs at Wendy as the man in charge of registration mispronounces her name, leaving her embarrassed.

Mabel exits the gym, becoming depressed. She tries to radio Dipper via walkie-talkie, saying that they can have the party at the gym but the future of high school is becoming bleak. Dipper is unable to respond, as there's too much interference on his end. Soos sits next to Mabel, suggesting that she delivers invitations to her friends. As the duo drive away, Mabel sees the high school sign has been changed to read "NO ESCAPE."

Ford and Dipper reach their destination - a large hill overlooking the floating cliffs of Gravity Falls. Ford remarks on how the cliffs look seemingly unnatural and oddly shaped, and Dipper realizes what Ford means when he holds a UFO keychain in front of him. Ford reveals to Dipper that the valley of Gravity Falls was created millions of years ago, when a spacecraft of some kind crash-landed into the area, creating the shape in the cliffs. The spacecraft is now buried under the town. Ford has had a lot of experience with the craft, having raided its parts to build his portal. He assures Dipper that all of the aliens inside have "probably" been dead for millions of years. Ford opens a hatch on the hill using a magnet gun and the duo head down into the depths of the spacecraft.

Inside the spacecraft, Ford and Dipper walk around, attempting to search through its halls for the adhesive. The duo pass through the craft, which is dominated by huge open spaces that contain mysterious message written in code, ruined machines and skeletal remains of the crafts' inhabitants. Ford tells Dipper that the spacecraft contains an alien adhesive powerful enough to seal the crack in the rift, and their job is to look for it. Ford uses his magnet gun to slide down several metal columns in order to head further into the craft, but Dipper is hesitant to follow him. He uses the magnet gun, but it ends up attaching him to the ceiling instead of pulling him down.

Meanwhile, Mabel goes to see Grenda and Candy in the hopes of giving them invitations to the birthday party. Unfortunately, Grenda will be visiting Marius von Fundshauser in Austria, and Candy will be at music camp. Mabel is sad that neither of her best friends will be able to come to her party or wish her goodbye when she leaves for home. They share a hug and Mabel leaves. She tries to radio Dipper, but he does not answer.

As they search, Ford offers to make Dipper his apprentice in learning about the secrets of Gravity Falls. Dipper is unsure since he would have to part with Mabel when she returned to California. As he speaks, he uses the magnet gun on one of the alien plates, revealing the adhesive. They are about to leave with the adhesive when suddenly, two prison droids appear. Ford tells Dipper that they focus on adrenaline, and if you are not scared, they will not hurt you. However, Dipper is unable to keep his fear in check, and realizing this Ford strikes first, destroying one of the droids with the magnet gun and the other droid attacks Dipper. Ford pushes him out of the way, but he is injured and captured by the droid. Dipper chases the droid through the saucer. The droid puts Ford into a different, ship-like droid, that will take Ford far away. As the little ship prepares to take off through a hatch in the saucer, Dipper attaches himself to the ship with the magnet gun. The ship takes off, streaking over the town and destroying the water tower as Dipper desperately tries to disable the ship. Ford hits his head in his cell-like bubble and is knocked out. Dipper uses the pulse option on the gun to disable the ship, which sends it crashing down in the woods.

After recovering, Dipper opens the pod and frantically tries to revive Ford. The malfunctioning prison droid that had captured Ford returns to take Ford and Dipper away. Dipper stands up to the droid, yelling that he isn't scared and that nothing will take away his uncle. The droid does not detect any adrenaline and disables itself. Ford finally recovers and praises Dipper.

Back at the Shack, Mabel is sad that summer is almost over and that high school is awful. Stan comes in to cheer her up, reminding her that growing old doesn't mean you have to grow up and that it is okay to have fun even as an adult. Mabel says that she doesn't want to say goodbye to Gravity Falls, but Stan reminds her that she still has her brother, no matter what. Mabel is cheered up by this. However, her walkie-talkie starts to crackle, broadcasting a conversation between Dipper and Ford.

Ford again extends the opportunity to stay in Gravity Falls to Dipper. Dipper decides to take the offer and they return to the Shack. Dipper bursts into the attic, eager to share the news with Mabel, but Mabel already knows, having overheard it on the walkie-talkie. Mabel is despondent, explaining what she went through and that when summer is over, the only thing she won't have to leave behind is her brother. However, if Dipper stays, she would have to leave absolutely everything behind. Dipper reminds her that things change, and summers end. Distraught, she grabs a bag and runs away crying into the woods.

After sitting down against a tree, Mabel looks through the bag, only to find that she had grabbed Dipper's bag by mistake. She wishes for summer to last forever. Blendin Blandin appears, offering to help her make a "time bubble" that will make time stop, letting summer last as long as Mabel wants it to. All he needs is something from her uncle - describing the rift. She finds it in Dipper's bag, not knowing of its importance.

In the basement, Dipper wonders if he's making the right decision by staying. Ford reminds him that they need to save the world and asks for the rift. He reaches into his bag, only to pull out a birthday party invitation instead. He realizes that he has Mabel's bag - but it is too late.

Mabel hands the rift over to Blendin, who takes it and smashes it on the ground, stomping it under his foot. The liquid of the rift surges across the ground as an unearthly wind howls with Blendin beginning to cackle before he takes off his goggles to reveal that he is possessed by Bill. Mabel realizes that she has made a horrible mistake, but before she can react, Bill, in Blendin's body, snaps his fingers, knocking Mabel unconscious. Bill leaves Blendin's body and enters the physical world, screaming about how the gateway between the Nightmare Realm and the real world has been opened after being prophesied for a billion years. Bill rises to the sky as the freed rift causes a gateway to the Nightmare Realm to appear up there. Dipper and Ford run outside to investigate the chaos, whereupon the latter discovers that they have failed - Weirdmageddon has begun, the family is split up, the town is in peril and everything is about to change.

The credits show one of Mabel's invitations on the ground, ruffling in the breeze. There is screaming and other sounds of distress fill the air. The paper blows away before the cryptogram appears.