"Into the Bunker" is the second episode of the second season of Gravity Falls and the 22nd episode overall. It premiered on August 4, 2014 on Disney XD.

**Official overview

Using the blacklight on one of the pages of Dipper's Journal, him and the gang go to the author's hidden bunker, where they find themselves face-to-face with a mysterious figure from Gravity Falls' lore.

**Synopsis

The episode begins with Dipper over at Wendy's house watching a horror movie, Nearly Almost Dead But Not Quite!. Dipper remarks that the film is less scary after actually having fought zombies. He and Wendy proceed to mock the film as predictable and lacking common sense. Wendy receives a text from Robbie to her annoyance, and Dipper learns that Robbie is still unable to get over his breakup with Wendy, despite his ex-girlfriend already having done so. Dipper then tries to nonchalantly ask if Wendy is dating again, and Wendy jokes that she is seeing a stuffed walrus. He then attempts to admit his feelings for her, but ultimately backs out and instead invites her to explore with him and Mabel. Wendy agrees to accompany them, and Dipper is upset and accidentally lies down on Wendy's bra, much to his horror.

Meanwhile, Stan supervises a construction crew repairing the Mystery Shack. When a worker inquires ask to what caused the damages, Stan, not wishing to reveal the zombie incident, lies and says it was a "big woodpecker." He then bribes the man, who accepts. He wonders where the others are, and the scene cuts to Soos and the twins gathered around the spot where Dipper first found Journal 3. Dipper informs the others that he has uncovered a new lead on the author's whereabouts — a hiding spot under a tree. Wendy then arrives and talks about how she had been wanting to come with the gang for some time, but has been stuck cleaning up after her father. Mabel pulls her brother aside to tease him about his crush on Wendy, but he lies that he is over her, though she does not believe him.

Wendy points out a branch that resembles a lever. As Dipper tries to think of a way to reach it, Wendy easily climbs up to it using her belt. She hits the switch with an axe and opens the entrance to a hidden bunker, and Dipper has the group promise not to tell anyone about what they may see. They descend the staircase and find an old fallout shelter, complete with rations to last at least to the year 2070. Dipper finds a recently opened can which prompts Soos' suspicion that the author may still be alive, and Wendy finds a hidden passageway, behind a map of Gravity Falls.

The four arrive in a small room with various symbols in it, and Soos and Wendy comment on the "creepy" feel of it. Mabel jokes that Dipper's internet history tops the room's eeriness, and accidentally pushes him onto a button, inadvertently setting off the security system. As the walls start pushing in, the gang turn to the journal for a solution, and they find they can open an escape hatch by pressing four symbols. They barely make it out, and Dipper's vest gets caught between the closing stones. As they inspect a surveillance room, Mabel goes to retrieve her brother's vest and finds a love letter he wrote to Wendy. Emboldened, she encourages him to reveal his true feelings. Dipper declines her request, so she pushes him into a closet with Wendy.

Wendy tries to turn on the lights, but accidentally finds the path to a secret laboratory. The two question what the author did down there and spot various holes, which they soon learn were dug by an unseen creature whose shadow approaches them. They frantically try to inform Mabel of the danger, but she refuses to let them out until Dipper tells Wendy how he feels. Dipper dodges this and drags Wendy to find another exit. They hit a dead end but are fortunately saved by a man claiming to be the author. Back in the surveillance room, Mabel and Soos play around with various equipment they find, including the author's lab coat and briefcase, when they uncover a note about a dangerous experiment (Experiment #210) called "the Shape Shifter." Soos remembers Dipper talking about a monster in the closet. Mabel is horrified as she thought he was joking, and so she and Soos rush to save their friends.

Dipper and Wendy run into Mabel and Soos, though they are suspicious that they may be their pursuer in disguise. However, after observing their goofy behavior, they are reassured their friends are who they appear to be. Dipper worries that if the creature escapes, he could assume the form of anyone, and Wendy prepares to launch an attack on him. While the Shape Shifter looks for Dipper, his target and Mabel enter the room. The monster then transforms into a horrifying amalgamation of the twins, who lead him toward Soos and Wendy, who have prepared a water pipe to blast him. The pipe briefly stalls, and Wendy goes after the monster with her ax before getting hit with a huge burst of water.

When the flooding subsides, Dipper encounters Wendy's unconscious body and begins to cry over her, believing she has died. Regretful, Dipper confesses he's in love with her, just as a second Wendy appears behind him. The form on the ground turns out to be the Shape Shifter, who engages in combat with the real Wendy. Dipper then picks up Wendy's ax and comes to help her, but he is unable to distinguish between the true and the copy. He asks for a sign, to which one Wendy simply winks whereas the other uses the zip-and-disposable-key gesture first seen in "The Inconveniencing." Dipper, realizing which Wendy is real, strikes the Shape Shifter in the chest, who howls out in pain while leaking a greenish blood and returns to his true form. Dipper and Wendy then force the monster into the cryogenic chamber in which he had previously been held, which Soos and Mabel activate. The Shape Shifter uses his last words to taunt Dipper he will never find the author and Dipper's fate will be worst than he can imagine, before morphing into a screaming Dipper as his final form.

The group leaves and seals the bunker, and they reflect on the adventure. Soos comments that his face is tired from screaming all day, and Mabel hails the four as heroes. Soos opts to take her back to the Shack for a "hero's breakfast," and praises her idea to put syrup on their cereal. Dipper and Wendy stay behind to discuss his crush on her, and while the former prepares for the worst, the latter informs him that she always suspected it. While she's flattered, Wendy lets Dipper down easy since she's too old for him but assures him, by reiterating how much his friendship means to her, that the situation between them is and will be fine. Wendy bikes home after reminding Dipper of tomorrow's movie night at his place, leaving him with a bittersweet feeling. Mabel then comes back to reveal that she heard the entire conversation and apologizes for her pushiness. Soos meets them and states that he is disappointed that they did not find the author. But while showing off the briefcase he recovered, they find it's actually the mysterious figure's old laptop. Soos says he could fix it in a few days' time, leading Dipper to think it could be their next clue. Back at the Shack, Dipper and Wendy watch a terrible movie marathon, and Dipper comments that he never wants to watch that channel again.




