"The Love God" is the ninth episode of the second season of Gravity Falls and the 29th episode overall. It premiered on November 26, 2014 on Disney XD.

**Official overview

Mabel takes matchmaking too far when she steals a love potion from the real Love God.

**Synopsis

The episode begins with Dipper, Mabel, Wendy, Lee, Nate, Tambry, and Thompson cloud watching, at the Gravity Falls Cemetery. Mabel then spots a hot air balloon, and Wendy explains that the annual Woodstick Festival is in town, featuring up and coming independent musicians. Dipper then confesses that he has never attended an actual concert, and Wendy states that it is because he has never had an "awesome crew to roll with before." While Lee and Nate are making Thompson lick a moldy sponge, an ominous moaning is heard. Wendy leads the group to an open grave, and Dipper makes Thompson investigate the site. Thompson screams at what he has found.

The others come over, and Tambry remarks that it is even creepier than she expected: Robbie mourning his and Wendy's breakup; when Wendy asks him about this, he tries his best to hide what he was doing, though no one seems to buy it. As the gang leaves, Mabel expresses a desire to comfort him, but Dipper shrugs it off, stating that the social balance is good as it is. However, Mabel cannot get over what she has seen. Back at the Mystery Shack, Wendy apologizes for the awkward encounter, and Mabel gets the idea to set Robbie up with a new date, citing her success with pairing up Soos and Melody and also Waddles and Gompers, as evidence for her abilities. Wendy, however, believes Robbie is a lost cause.

Outside, Stan is working on a new exhibit when he notices the Woodstick balloons, bikes, and folk singers. Panicked, he instructs Soos to lock up and attempts to shoot down the balloons with a crossbow. Soos stops him, pointing out that there is a potential for profit, and Stan deduces that he can appeal to the youth by learning via a Mystery Shack-themed balloon. Back at the cemetery, Mabel makes her way to Robbie's house and is greeted by his parents, whom she is surprised to learn are extremely upbeat and friendly.

Mabel goes to Robbie's room, knocks on the door and tells him who she is, but Robbie doesn't recognize her, so Mabel tells him that she is Dipper's sister, Robbie recognizes her and tells her to leave, but Mabel enters anyway. Robbie tells Mabel that the Pines family wasn't welcome there and blames Dipper for ruining his life (when Robbie is to blame for ruining his own life for lying to Wendy), Mabel tells Robbie that she always saw him as a creepy jerk (like the human version of rat poison), but when she saw him in the cemetery, she thought that Robbie wasn't a bad guy and just had a broken heart. Mabel promises Robbie that she'll help him find true love or twice his sadness back and Robbie accepts her help to get her out of her room. At the Shack, Mabel considers potential matches and ultimately decides on Tambry. Meanwhile, Dipper, Wendy, and the gang prepare for Woodstick at Thompson's house, where Dipper receives praise for his idea on how to sneak in snacks: taping them to Thompson. At Greasy's Diner, Mabel is horrified that Robbie's and Tambry's date is a disaster though her hope returns after witnessing a man called the "Love God" at work. He informs her that he uses Love potions, but refuses to sell her one. However, she steals one when he goes to kiss a girl and adds it to Robbie's and Tambry's chili fries.

When Mabel announces the news to the other teens, none react well: Nate says that Robbie knows he likes Tambry, Lee is upset that Nate never told him, and Wendy is appalled by Tambry dating her ex without Tambry telling her anything. Angered, the trio storms off, and Thompson scolds Mabel for breaking up his only friends. Desperate not to lose the group, Dipper agrees to help Mabel undo the effects of her love potion. At Woodstick, Stan and Soos prepare their balloon with a lack of attention to safety, Thompson tries to drag the others there, hoping not to waste the money, and Robbie and Tambry display their affection via a romantic stroll. Dipper is disgusted by this though Mabel silences him while the two go to the Love God's van to get an anti-love potion, only for them to get caught.

The twins flee into the concert area, the Love God close on their tail. The chase is eventually halted when the Love God conjures images of Mabel's past crushes to distract her and eventually convince her to return the potion. However, when Stan and Soos send off their poorly-made balloon, it terrifies the crowds when they saw that the balloon said "I Eat Kids" instead of saying "I Heart Kids," ultimately crashing on the Love God. Stan welcomes the fearful reactions, and the god, fed up, tells Mabel to take the potion and meddle in others' lives all she wants. The twins make their way to Robbie and Tambry though Mabel refuses to use the potion upon seeing how happy the two are as a couple. When Dipper asks about their group of friends, Mabel suggests that they will eventually reconcile on their own, which then happens upon seeing Thompson running from security guards for bringing outside food into the festival.

During the ending credits, a photo montage of Waddles' and Gompers' wedding day is shown.